Exploring SAIG Methods for an Objective Evaluation of XAI Miquel Mir´o-Nicolau1,2†, Gabriel Moya`-Alcover1,2†, Anna Arias-Duart3*† 1UGiVIA Research Group, University of the Balearic Islands, Dpt. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Palma, 07122, Balearic Islands, Spain. 2Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence Applications (LAIA@UIB), University of the Balearic Islands, Dpt. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Palma, 07122, Balearic Islands, Spain. 3Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, 08034, Catalonia, Spain. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): anna.ariasduart@bsc.es; Contributing authors: miquel.miro@uib.cat; gabriel.moya@uib.cat; †These authors contributed equally to this work. Abstract The evaluation of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) methods is a rapidly growing field, characterized by a wide variety of approaches. This diversity highlights the complexity of the XAI evaluation, which, unlike traditional AI assessment, lacks a universally correct ground truth for the explanation, mak- ing objective evaluation challenging. One promising direction to address this issue involves the use of what we term Synthetic Artificial Intelligence Ground truth (SAIG) methods, which generate artificial ground truths to enable the direct evaluation of XAI techniques. This paper presents the first review and analysis of SAIG methods. We introduce a novel taxonomy to classify these approaches,identifyingsevenkeyfeaturesthatdistinguishdifferentSAIGmeth- ods. Our comparative study reveals a concerning lack of consensus on the most effective XAI evaluation techniques, underscoring the need for further research and standardization in this area. Keywords:XAIevaluation,explainability,syntheticartificialintelligencegroundtruth 1 6202 beF 9 ]IA.sc[ 1v51780.2062:viXra 1 Introduction ArtificialIntelligence(AI)hasbecomeubiquitousinmodernsociety,withapplications in numerous fields obtaining impressive results. Much of this progress began with advances in machine learning and, in particular, with the development of the first functional deep learning models [1]. In computer vision, deep learning, especially through Convolutional Neural Net- works (CNNs), has enabled significant advances in tasks such as image classification, object detection, and segmentation. More recently, the introduction of transformer- based architectures and large-scale multimodal pretraining has led to the emergence of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), which are capable of jointly processing and rea- soning over visual and textual modalities. Although recent VLMs promise powerful capabilities, they still face critical limitations: they struggle with negation [2], basic geometricreasoning[3],dataleakage[4],andreliabilityinsensitivetaskssuchasmed- ical diagnosis [5]. Combined with their high computational costs, these shortcomings limit their applicability in many real-world settings. As a result, simpler architectures like CNNs remain widely used due to their effi- ciency,scalabilityandstrongperformanceinmanyvisiontasks.Yet,likelargermodels, CNNs also suffer from a lack of interpretability, a challenge commonly referred to as the “black-box problem” [6]. As Vilone and Longo [7] note, the term “black-box” refers to the fact that most deep learning models are “extremely difficult to interpret and explain to laypeople”. To address this issue, the field of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has emerged. XAI seeks to shift the focus towards more transparent AI systems by devel- opingasuiteoftechniquesthatimproveinterpretabilitywhilepreservinghighlevelsof performance [8]. In recent years, XAI has become a highly active field, encompassing various lines of research [9]. XAI methods can be broadly categorized into two main approaches: ante-hoc and post-hoc explainability. Ante-hoc approaches are characterized by the use of inherently transparent mod- els, such as linear regression, decision trees, and k-nearest neighbors. While these models offer interpretability by design, a major limitation lies in their comparatively lower performance when contrasted with black-box models. Moreover, increasing the complexity of these otherwise simple models can also render them opaque [10]. To overcome these limitations, recent works have proposed complex but explainable-by- design models, such as networks like ProtoPNet [11] and PIP-Net [12], that aim to combine interpretability with competitive accuracy. On the other hand, post-hoc methods aim to explain already trained black-box modelswhilepreservingtheirpredictiveperformance.Thiscategoryisthemostwidely used in practice, which has led to the development of a wide variety of post-hoc techniques in the literature [13–18]. However, this diversity has led to the so-called disagreement problem. First defined by Krishna et al. [19], the disagreement problem is the fact that “explanations generated by various methods disagree with each other – e.g., the top-k most important features output by different methods may differ”. To address the disagreement problem, different approaches have been proposed to evaluate XAI methods. According to multiple authors [7, 20–23], evaluation 2 mainly falls into two categories: human based analysis (also known as human- grounded[22,23],andplausability[20])andmachinecenteredanalysis(alsoknownas functionally grounded [22, 23], correctness [20], and objective evaluation [7]). Human based analysis contains “those studies that evaluated methods for explainability with a human-in-the-loop approach by involving end-users” [7]. Biecek and Samek [24] identifythesetwoapproachesastwodifferentevaluationscultures:RED(formachine centred approaches) and BLUE (for human centered approaches). While the importance of human-centered evaluation is undeniable, it relies on the assumption that the explanations are faithful to the underlying model; if this faithfulness is lacking, human evaluation alone can be misleading. Therefore, in this work, we focus on machine-centered evaluations, as we believe that building truly trustworthy XAI systems requires prioritizing the assessment of alignment between explanations and model behavior. Since there is no GT for what constitutes a correct explanation, some methods addressthischallengebycreatingsyntheticdatasetsormethodologiesthatincludeGT (or semi GT) explanations. In this work, we introduce the term Synthetic Artificial Intelligence Ground truth (SAIG) to refer to these methods. Our study specifically focusesonSAIGmethodsthatleveragetheseground-truthexplanationstoobjectively evaluate XAI techniques. This paper has two main contributions: (1) a review of the SAIG state-of-the-art approaches to objectively evaluate XAI methods, and (2) the proposal of a taxonomy to classify and compare these methods. The taxonomy is designed to highlight sim- ilarities between approaches and uncover current trends in the field. More broadly, our objective is to advance the evaluation landscape by introducing a systematic perspective that is currently lacking in much of the existing literature. The document is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the various types of machine-centered explanations. Section 3 reviews the image-based SAIG methods identified in the literature. Section 4 describes the XAI methods that are evaluated using SAIG approaches. Section 5 introduces our proposed taxonomy and classifies thereviewedmethodologiesaccordingly.Section6analyzespatternsandrelationships amongSAIGapproaches.Finally,Section7concludestheworkanddiscussespotential future directions for the field. 2 XAI evaluation Machine-centered evaluation, those that “employed objective metrics and automated approaches to evaluate methods for explainability” [7], typically rely on XAI met- rics. These approaches focuses on assessing specific properties of explanations based on assumed relationships between the model’s input, output, and the generated explanation.Withinthiscategorywefindfidelitymetrics[15,25,26],robustnessmet- rics [26–28], among others. However, several authors have raised criticisms regarding their reliability [29–32]. In particular, for image data, the generation of out-of- distributionsamplescanleadmodelstobehaveunpredictably,renderingtheresulting metrics unreliable and limiting the validity of any conclusions drawn from them [32]. 3 This challenge highlights the need for more robust evaluation strategies in the vision domain and motivates our focus on image-based XAI evaluation in this work. The complexity of the previous metrics is what H¨edstrom et al. [30] called the challenge of unveriafibility. These authors noted that the limits of the evaluation arise from the lack of an available ground truth (GT) for the explanation. Multiple explanation can be correct to solve a task, but for a singular element and a particular element only exist one correct explanation. Aiminigtosolvethechallengeofunveriafibility afieldofstudyemergedaroundthe developmentofsyntheticdatasetsthatincludebuilt-inground-truth(orsemiground- truth) explanations. As introduced earlier, we refer to this paradigm as Synthetic Artificial Intelligence Ground truth (SAIG). Several works in the literature have pro- posed SAIG datasets [27, 33–39]. Although this paper focuses exclusively on image data [35–38], the field spans multiple data modalities, including tabular [33, 35, 40], and text [39]. Despite the increasing interest in SAIGs datasets, the field still lacks a unified terminology, a shared taxonomy, and a thorough analysis of prior work. To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no comprehensive review or taxonomy specifi- cally focused on SAIG approaches in the XAI literature. As new SAIG methodologies emerge all these limitations suposse a major setback for the field’s development. 3 SAIG Methods WeidentifiedsixteendifferentSAIGimageproposals,assummarizedinTable1.These studies exhibit two notable similarities: most do not analyze prior state-of-the-art approaches and can be categorized based on a shared set of characteristics. Right for the Right Reasons Although explanation evaluation is not the main goal of this work [41], Ross et al. introducetwoSAIGdatasetsdesignedtoevaluatemodelexplanations.TheToy Color dataset consists of simple 5×5×3 RGB images with class labels based on specific color patterns in the corners and top-middle pixels, these are the GT features for explanation. The Decoy MNIST dataset modifies standard MNIST by adding gray switches in the corners whose shades depend on the label during training but become random at test time, thus, the digit shape is the GT feature. Visual Explanation by Interpretation Oramas et al. [42] introduced the an8Flower dataset, a synthetic dataset designed for evaluating explanations. It consists of flower images where different parts of the object, such as petals or stems, change color to define multiple classes. For example, the an8Flower-single-6c variant contains 6 classes distinguished by color changes in a single part. In the an8Flower-double-12c variant, both the color and the specific part that changes color serve as discriminative features defining the 12 classes. The GT explanations are provided as masks highlighting these parts specific to each class. 4 Benchmarking Attribution Methods with Relative Feature Importance Yang et al. [34] proposed the Benchmarking Attribution Methods (BAM) dataset, a syntheticdatasetinwhichGTfeaturerelevanceiscontrolled.Thiscontrolisachieved by pasting objects from the MSCOCO [43] dataset into scene images from the Mini- Places [44] dataset. Each composite image has both an object label (e.g., dog) and a scenelabel(e.g.,bedroom),allowingmodelstobetrainedtopredicteithertheobject (relying on the pasted region) or the scene (relying on the background). This setup defines which regions of the image should be relevant to the prediction and which should not. Do Input Gradients Highlight Discriminative Features? Shah et al. [45] introduced the BlockMNIST dataset, a synthetic benchmark based on MNIST. Each image is constructed by vertically concatenating two 28×28 image blocks: a signal block (an MNIST digit image of 0 or 1) and a null block containing non-discriminativepatterns.Thesignalandnullblocksarerandomlyplacedatthetop or bottom of the image with equal probability. Only the signal block determines the class label (i.e., the GT for feature relevance), while the null block is uninformative. Evaluating local explanation methods on ground truth Guidotti et al. [35] developed the seneca-img, a generator of synthetic transparent image classifiers from which it is possible to extract synthetic GT explanations. The authors evaluate explanation methods using this transparent classifier, which uses a simplepatternmatchingapproach,alongwithadatasetconsistingofsyntheticimages offixedsizewithablackbackground.Eachimageisdividedintoagridofsmallercells, and a pattern is inserted into half of the images to train and test the classifier. Since the classifier’s decision depends solely on the presence of this pattern, the pattern itself serves as the GT explanation. Focus! Rating XAI Methods and Finding Biases Arias-Duartetal.[37]introducedtheFocus,anevaluationscoreforfeatureattribution methodsthatusesmosaicsasGT.Thesemosaicsarecreatedbycombiningimagesfrom different classes within the original data distribution. Focus measures the proportion of relevance that falls within the regions corresponding to the relevant classes. Since Focus functions similarly to a precision metric, other classification metrics such as recall and F1-score can also be applied to evaluate explanation methods alongside mosaics, as discussed in [46]. Importantly, the mosaic methodology can be applied to any dataset without requiring model retraining. CLEVR-XAI Arras et al. [36] proposed a methodology for generating a SAIG based on visual ques- tion answering (VQA) models. These models are specific types of AI models that can answerquestionsregardingthecontentofanimage.Theseauthorsproposedtodefine a set of well crafted questions, allowing to know whether and object is important or not. 5 Investigating the fidelity of explainable artificial intelligence methods Mamalakis et al. [47] defined a set of images containing circular and square frames of random size. They proposed a binary classification task: the first class corresponds to instances where the area of the circle is larger than that of the square, and the secondclasstotheoppositecase.Consequently,theauthorsusedtheexpectedsignof the explanation as the GT: the first class the pixels corresponding to circular objects must have positive attributions, while the square ones negatives. Towards Better Understanding Attribution Methods Rao et al. [48] built upon previous mosaic-based approaches [37, 49]. Their main contribution is the use of modified models that ensure the predictions for different classification classes are not influenced by one another. Sanity Simulations for Saliency Methods Kim et al. [50] proposed to combine a set of synthethic shapes (letters and squares) in a uniform background to generate the image SAIG. The authors trained a binary classificationmodel,theclassesdependonthepresenceornotofsomeofthesynthethic shapes. This setup allows the authors to know which elements are important and which are not. FunnyBirds Hesse et al. [51] proposed a synthetic vision dataset consisting of 3D birds designed using five human-comprehensible concepts: beak, wings, feet, eyes, and tail. Each FunnyBird class consists of a unique combination of these parts and a bird body. This configuration allows for evaluating the importance of the different parts without having to predefine it beforehand. Assessing fidelity in XAI post-hoc techniques Mir´o-Nicolau et al. [38] proposed a SAIG composed of simple geometric shapes. They adaptedapreviousapproachbasedontabulardatasets,enablingthegenerationofan XAI GT with predefined and specific importance values for each pixel. Finally, they compared the saliency maps produced by 16 XAI methods to this GT, treating both as probability distributions. Convolutional Dynamic Alignment Networks B¨ohle et al. [49] introduced Dynamic Alignment Units (DAUs), which improve the interpretability of neural networks. To evaluate them, they used two strategies: first, they assessed a localization metric by adapting the pointing game to the CIFAR-10 and TinyImageNet datasets, evaluating attribution methods on a grid of n×nn×n images; second, they analyzed the model’s behavior using a pixel removal strategy. Classification Metrics for Image Explanations Fresz et al. [52] presented an extension of the work by Arias-Duart et al. [37], con- sidering negative Feature Importance (FI). Both positive and negative FI are taken 6 into account for the specification of true positives and negatives, as well as false pos- itives and negatives, with respect to the FI on the mosaics. A complete confusion matrix can thus be defined, enabling the computation of metrics commonly applied in classification tasks. Do Feature Attribution Methods Correctly Attribute Features? Zhou et al. [53] proposed evaluating attribution methods datasets systematically modified to introduce ground truth information for attributions, they called natu- ral datasets. The modifications (blurring, brightness change, hue shift, pixel noise and watermark) ensures that any classifier with sufficiently high performance has to rely, sometimes solely, on the manipulations. They studied the attribution percentage assigned to the joint effective region as their main metric. Quantifying Explainability of Saliency Methods Tjoaetal.[54]createdasyntheticdatasetwithin-builtGTheatmaps.Theygenerated unambiguous discrete-valued attribution heatmaps as explanation and introduced of metric that computes pixelwise hits and misses. The dataset is also customizable and augmented with noisy variations of basic shapes. 4 XAI methods The vast majority of the SAIG discussed in the previous section not only propose approachesforobtaininganXAIgroundtruth,butalsousetheirproposalstocompare multiplestate-of-the-artXAImethods.Table2summarizestheXAImethodsanalyzed across the different SAIG methods, highlighting in green the best-performing method according to each respective study. In total, 32 distinct XAI methods are evaluated. The primary distinction between XAI methods was already discussed in the intro- duction: ante-hoc or post-hoc methods. Among the 32 methods used in the reviewed SAIG approaches, only four are ante-hoc. Moreover, when counting the number of times each method is applied, ante-hoc methods are used only five times, compared to 121 uses of post-hoc methods. We expected this result: ante-hoc are transparent by definition and, therefore, the evaluation (from a machine-centred point of view) of their explainability quality is superfluous. Additionally, XAI methods can be categorised according to multiple features. We classifythembothdependingontheirinnerworkingandoutputtype.Barredo-Arrieta et al. [6] define six categories depending on the output type. Within the SAIG papers wereviewedweonlyfindtwocategoriesfromBarredo-Arrietaetal.[6]proposal:expla- nation by example andfeature relevance.Furthemore,wealsoconsiderexplanation by concept, as a different output type: • Feature relevance.AccordingtoBarredo-Arrietaet al.[6]“clarifytheinnerfunc- tioningofamodelbycomputingarelevancescoreforitsmanagedvariables”.Within this category we can find saliency maps in the image context. Examples of these methods are, among others: LRP [15], Gradient [14], GradCAM [55]. • Explanations by example. The same authors [6] defined it as methods that “consider the extraction of data examples that relate to the result generated by a 7 certain model, enabling to get a better understanding of the model itself”. Within this category we identified ProtoPNet [11]. • Explanation by concept. This category consider all the methods that aimed to explain the prediction according to the importance of some human concept. We identified TCAV [56] and BagNet [57] as Concept explanations. Mir´o-Nicolau et al. [38] propose a taxonomy according to the inner working for post-hoc feature relevance methods. Following their proposal we categorize into three distincts categories: • Backpropgation-based methods. Set of XAI methods that obtained the expla- nation propagating the output to the input. Most methods used the built-in back- propagationalgorithmofthemodel,someofthemmodifyinghowthenon-linearities arehandled.Examplesofmethodsfromthiscategoryare:Smoothgrad[58],Guided Backpropagation [59], Integrated gradients [60] among others. • CAM methods. XAI methods based on the original work from Zhou et al. [17]. The methods within this category are characterised by obtaining the explanation throughtheoutputofaconvolutionallayer,thereforeonlybeingabletouseitwith CNN.Thisoutput,asetofsmallmatrixes,isthenupsampledtothesizeoftheimage and weighted with some importance puntuaction. Examples of methods from this category are: GradCAM [55], GradCAM++ [18] or ScoreCAM [61], among others. • Perturbation-based methods. XAI methods consisting on modifying the input dataandanalysingthebehaviouroftheoutputasaproxytoobtaintheexplanation. In images the perturbation procedure consists, usually, on the substitution of the orginalvaluesofapartofthepixelsforanuniformvalue.Examplesofthisapproach are well-known methods such as: LIME [16], Occlusion [13], among others. From the study of the XAI methods used we can see that SAIG methodologies are used with a large and diverse set of explanaibility techniques. Additionally, from this analysis we can confirm that the XAI methods usage trends, already studied in different reviews of the XAI field [6, 9]. Particularly, the predominance of post-hoc approaches and the prevelance of saliency maps for images. 5 Taxonomy of SAIG Methods In this section, we detail the common features and propose a taxonomy to organize the SAIG methods accordingly. The taxonomy is organized around five dimensions that characterize SAIG evaluation methods. First, we examine the image features used to construct datasets, including the type of visual elements, their position, and background(§5.1).Wethenexplorehowthegroundtruthisdefined(§5.2)andencoded (§5.3).Next,weassessthegenerabilityofthesemethods,referringtotheiradaptability to different use cases (§5.4). Finally, we categorize the different evaluation metrics used to assess explanation quality, providing a complete view of how explainability methods are benchmarked (§5.5). 8 5.1 Image Features This category refers to the visual characteristics that can be precisely controlled to designdatasetsforevaluatingXAImethods.Inthissection,weexaminethreefeatures of such images: the type of the evaluation elements, their position within the image, and the background on which they are placed. These features are not independent; choices made in one of them often constrain or determine the others. 5.1.1 Type Thiscategoryreferstothediffernttypesofvisualelementsusedinevaluationdatasets. We identify three main categories (see Figure 1): 1. Simple figures. These typically consist of 2D geometric shapes such as squares, circles, or triangles, [35, 38, 41, 47, 54] and in some cases, textual elements [50]. A fewdatasetsextendthiscategorytoincluderendered3Dshapes[36].Simplefigures are often associated with uniform backgrounds, allowing for minimal visual inter- ference. This simplicity facilitates the analysis of model behavior and the isolation of specific visual attributes. 2. Complex figures. These are usually composed of multiple polygons or abstract shapes that approximate real-world objects without being photographic in nature. In [51] they constructed a fine-grained bird species dataset inspired by the CUB- 200-2011 dataset [62]. In [42] they generated a dataset by taking as starting point an eggplant model and they introduced discriminative features to define each of theclassesofinterest.Finallyin[53]theysuperimposedvisualelementssegmented from real-world datasets. In [34] the evaluation elements consists on modifications on images. 3. Real-world images. This category includes images sourced from widely used datasetssuchasImageNet[63],COCO[43],CIFAR10[64],MIT67[65],Places365- Standard [44], Dogs vs. Cats1 and MAMe [66]. These images offer high visual complexity and semantic richness. Articles that fall in this category include: [37, 45, 48, 49, 52]. 5.1.2 Position With respect to the spatial positioning of evaluation elements, we identify two main categories (see Figure 2): 1. Random positions. evaluation elements are randomly assigned across the image space.Articlesthatfallintothiscategoryinclude[34–36,38,42,47,50,51,53,54]. 2. Predefined positions. leading to more controlled and interpretable setups. Amongthefixed-positionapproaches,acommonandwidelyadoptedpatternisthe use of grid-based arrangements, typically in a 2×2 layout where evaluation elements are placed in a mosaic. This structure facilitates the definition of position-dependent rules and enables clearer attribution analysis. Most existing evaluation methods fall into this mosaic idea [37, 45, 48, 49, 52]. 1https://www.kaggle.com/c/dogs-vs-cats/overview 9 8 7 6 5 4 4 2 0 Simple Complex Real-World epyT Fig. 1: Distribution of visual elements by its type. A different idea of fixed-position approach is introduced in [41], which present a dataset composed of 5×5×3 RGB images with four possible colors. In this case, all evaluation attributes are positioned deterministically. The dataset design embeds two distinct, position-dependent classification rules that a model could implicitly learn: whetherthefourcornerpixelssharethesamecolor,andwhetherthetop-middlethree pixels each have different colors. 10 10 6 5 0 Random Predefined noitisoP Fig. 2: Distribution of visual elements by position. Five out of six articles that use predefined positions rely on mosaics. 5.1.3 Background Weidentifythreecategoriesofbackgroundconfigurationsbasedonourfindingsinthe literature (see Figure 3): 10 1. Uniform background.Theentireimagebackgroundishomogeneous,typicallya solidcolor.Thissettingminimizesisolatestheimportanceofforegroundevaluation elements [35, 36, 38, 42, 47, 50]. 2. Compositional background. Objects or evaluation attributes are superimposed onto background, sampled from natural images or generated textures. This con- figuration enables the creation of more complex datasets, particularly penalizing occlusion-based XAI methods, as it allows for the generation of out-of-distribution images. 3. No background. In mosaic or grid-based images where each pixel is part of an evaluation element, the concept of a background becomes irrelevant. In such cases, theentireimageareaisdedicatedtoevaluation-relevantcontent[37,45,48,49,52]. Regarding compositional background, there are multiple approaches. In [34] they constructed a dataset by pasting object pixels from [43] into scene images from Mini- Places [44], in [53] they use a self constructed birds dataset as background. In [51] they locate different background objects in the image by using a deterministic algo- rithm to reflect real-world challenges. In [54] they propose 3 different backgrounds to increase the variation of dataset. 6 6 5 5 4 2 0 Uniform Compositional No Background dnuorgkcaB Fig. 3: Types of backgrounds in SAIG datasets. Among all possible combinations of type, position, and background, only six occurrences have been observed, as illustrated in Figure 4. 5.2 Ground Truth definition This category refers on how the different author produce the XAI GT. This category and the following, the Ground Truth value, are highly related: how the GT is defined produce a particular type of GT. Therefore, we expected a high dependency between both of them. Based on our findings we identified three main different approaches to generate GT (see Figure 5): 11 (a) Image from [38]. Simple (b)Imagefrom[41].Simple (c) Image from [37]. Real objects, random position objects, predefined position world images, predefined and uniform background. and no background. position and no back- ground. (d) Image from [51]. Com- (e) Image from [42]. Com- (f) Image from [54]. Simple plex objects, random plex objects, random posi- objects, random position position and compositional tion, uniform background. and compositional back- background. ground. Fig. 4:Representativeexamplesofthedifferentcombinationsofobjecttype,position, and background used in the analyzed datasets. 1. Identity. This approach involves training an AI model to determine whether a specific element is present or absent. Consequently, it is expected that any expla- nation produced should be localized within that element. This is the most widely used approach, and in fact, the other categories are conceptually derived from it. Within this category, we distinguish between Predefined positions methods [37, 45, 48, 49, 52] and Random positions methods [17, 35, 36, 41, 42, 50, 54], as described in Section 5.1. 2. A priori. This approach involves training AI model with defined elements impor- tance.TheauthorsoftheseapproachesaimedtodefinedaSAIGdatasetwithsome kindofrelationbetweenthedifferentelementspresentintheimages.Weidentified three works proposing this: Yang and Kim [34] defined the GT as an important element and none-important element; Mamalakis et al. [47] defined the sign of the 12 relevance of each element, defining an AI output that increase or decrease depend- ing on different elements; Mir´o-Nicolau et al. [38] defined the AI prediction as following a predefined function that gives different weights to different elements. 3. Interventions.ThisapproachhasbeenproposedbyHesseet al.[51].Theauthors obtained the relevance of each part by removing a particular part from an image anddefineditsimportanceasthedifferencebetweentheAIoutputafterandbefore this removal operation. As a result obtained local XAI GT, adhered by design to the AI model. 12 10 5 3 1 0 Identity A priori Interventions noitinfieD TG Fig. 5: Distribution of SAIG methods by GT definition categories. The majority use the Identity definition, followed by A priori. 5.3 Ground Truth Value This category refers to the format and values of the generated GT. It defines what is consideredacorrectexplanationandiscloselyrelatedtotheevaluationmetrics,which will be discussed later in this paper. We identified three main types of GT values (see Figure 6): 1. Binary. Each pixel in the image is labeled as either important or not important. The resulting GT is, explicitly or implicitly, a binary mask. 2. Relative. A relative ranking of image parts is established, where some parts relevance are expected to be more important than others. 3. Multivalue. Each pixel is assigned a specific relevance score. variant of this approach considers only the sign of the relevance (positive or negative), while the full version expects an exact numerical value. This results in a saliency map as the GT. Binary, or positional, GT is the simplest and most intuitive format, and conse- quently, the most widely used. From the sixteen analysed articles, ten lies within this category[35–37,42,45,48–50,52–54].OnlyonearticleproposedaRelativeGTvalue, YanandKim[34].Finally,morerecentlyasetofauthorsaimedtogenerateSAIGwith 13 specific explanation value [38, 47, 51]. The increased complexity of these approaches made necessary the usage of more complex measures. 12 10 5 3 1 0 Binary Relative Multivalue eulav TG Fig. 6: Number of SAIG methods by GT value types. The majority of methods use Binary GT values, with fewer employing Multivalue and only one using Relative GT values. 5.4 Generability This category refers to the extent to which an evaluation method can be applied beyond its original context. Some methods are broadly adaptable, while others are tightlycoupledtoaspecificsettingandcannotbeeasilygeneralizedtootherusecases. Broadly, we can distinguish between two types of evaluation methods (see Figure 7): 1. Generalizable methods. These allow users to build GT data tailored to their specificusecases.Becausetheevaluationprocessisbuiltontheuser’sowndataset, the method remains adaptable. 2. Non-generalizable methods.ThesearebasedonpredefinedGTdatasets.While they provide insight into the attribution quality, they are limited in scope and cannot be directly applied to new or custom used cases. Most existing evaluation methods fall into the non-generalizable category [34–36, 38,41,42,47,50,51,53,54].However,someapproaches[37,45,48,49,52],particularly those based on mosaic techniques, offer greater generalizability. By allowing users to generate GT using their own dataset images, these methods provide a more flexible and reusable framework for evaluation. 5.5 Evaluation Measures This section categorizes metrics used to evaluate explanation methods into four main types (see Figure 8), based on how they assess explanation quality. 14 11 10 5 5 0 Generalizable Non-generalizable ytilibareG Fig. 7:Numberofgeneralizableandnon-generalizablemethods.Themajority(11out of 16) are non-generalizable. 1. SpatialAlignmentMetrics.Thesemetricsassesshowwelltheexplanationaligns spatially with GT regions. Some works, such as [42], use intersection over union (IoU)betweenthresholdedattributionheatmapsandGTmasks.However,asnoted by [50], IoU discards valuable information by converting continuous attribution maps into binary masks, ignoring the intensity of the attributions. Another approach, used in [36, 41], measures how many of the top-k most relevant pixels fall within the GT. This metric is referred to as Relevance Rank Accuracy in [36]. Similarly, in the BlockMNIST setting [45], the fraction of top-k attributionslocatedinthenull(non-informative)blockisusedtoquantifyincorrect attribution. Although these methods capture whether the most relevant (or least relevant) regions align spatially with GT, they treat all top-ranked pixels equally, ignoring the magnitude of their attribution scores. To address this, other works preserve the magnitude of the attribution rather than discarding it. These approaches compute the proportion of total attribution that lies within the GT region, similar to precision [37, 48–50, 53]. Arias et al. [37] refertothisasFocus,usingmosaicsforevaluation;Arrasetal.[36]callitRelevance Mass Accuracy; and Zhou et al. refer to it as Attr%, where the GT corresponds to the manipulated region. A related approach is proposed by Hesse et al. [51], where a part is considered important if its cumulative attribution exceeds a percentage of the total. Their synthetic dataset allows defining known sufficient and irrelevant parts, enabling metrics such as the Controlled Synthetic Data Check (CSDC), which measures how well an explanation highlights sufficient parts, and Distractibility (D), which quantifies the extent to which irrelevant parts are mistakenly highlighted. Finally, some works treat attribution maps as classifier outputs, applying stan- dardclassificationmetricslikeprecision,recall,F1-score,orROCcurves[35,52,54]. This typically allows evaluations to account for negative relevance as well. 15 2. Statistical Agreement Metrics. This category assesses the agreement between attribution maps and GT using standard statistical techniques, such as correlation measures [47]. Although these metrics capture the overall value correspondence, they ignore the spatial structure of the attributions. 3. Distribution-basedmetrics.Thiscategoryinterpretsbothattributionmapsand GT masks as probability distributions. For example, Mir´o et al. [38] use Earth Mover’sDistance(EMD)[67],whichmeasurestheminimalwork requiredtotrans- form one distribution into another, and the Similarity Metric (MIN) [68], which quantifies overlap by summing the minimum values at each pixel. 4. Comparative Evaluation Metrics. This category tests whether the attribution methods reflect differences in input or model relevance. The Model Contrast Score (MSC) [34] compares two models trained on a different setting: one trained on object labels and another on scene labels. The metric measures the difference in attributionforaspecificregion(e.g., adog),whichshouldbehigherintheobject- trained model. The Input Dependence Rate (IDR) [34] evaluates a single scene trained model by comparing input with and without an object, expecting lower attribution when the object is added. 13 10 5 1 1 1 0 Spatial Distribution Statistical Comparative Alignment based Agreement serusaem noitaulavE Fig.8:Countsofevaluationmeasuresbycategory.ThemajorityareSpatialAlignment measures(13),whileDistribution-based,StatisticalAgreement,andComparativemea- sures are less frequent, each with a count of 1. 16 Table 1: Overview of SAIG approaches and their evaluation properties. The colored headers are linked to the sections where each dimension is discussed in detail. Image Features GT Definition GT Value Generability Measure Type Position Background [41] Simple Predefined NoBackground Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment [42] Complex Random Uniform Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment [34] Complex Random Compositional Identity Relative No Comparative [45] Real Predefined NoBackground A priori Binary Yes SpatialAlignment [35] Simple Random Uniform Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment [37] Real Predefined NoBackground Identity Binary Yes SpatialAlignment [36] Complex Random Uniform Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment [47] Simple Random Uniform A priori Multivalue(sign) No StatisticalAgreement [48] Real Predefined NoBackground Identity Binary Yes SpatialAlignment [50] Simple Random Uniform Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment [51] Complex Random Compositional Interventions Multivalue No SpatialAlignment [38] Simple Random Uniform A priori Multivalue No Distribution-based [49] Real Predefined NoBackground Identity Binary Yes SpatialAlignment [52] Real Predefined NoBackground Identity Binary Yes SpatialAlignment [53] Complex Random Compositional Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment [54] Simple Random Compositional Identity Binary No SpatialAlignment 17 6 Discussion To better understand dependencies within the proposed taxonomy, we perform two levels of analysis: one at the category level (e.g., GT Value, Generability, etc.), and another at the subcategory level (e.g., Binary, Relative, Multivalue, Generalizable, Non-generalizable, etc.). First, we compute Cram´er’s V, a statistical measure of association between cat- egorical variables that ranges from 0 (no association) to 1 (perfect association). To visualize these associations, we build a dependency graph (see Figure 9), where each noderepresentsacategoryandedgesconnectthosewithaCram´er’sVaboveaselected threshold (0.4). The thickness of each edge reflects the strength of the association. This graph provides an overview of how different aspects of evaluation methods, such as the GT definition, background choices, or generability, interact and influence one another. To further explore the strongest dependencies, we generate a complementary visualization: a pairwise co-occurrence heatmap (see Figure 10). Rows and columns represent subcategories from broader taxonomy categories, and the color intensity of Fig. 9:DependencygraphbasedonCram´er’sV.Itshowsthestrengthofassociations between categories. 18 each cell reflects how frequently each pair co-occurs in the survey data (Table 1). Darker colors indicate more frequent co-occurrence. Let us analyze the fifth strongest dependencies. Position and Background (Cram´er’s V = 1.0). Thereisaperfectassociationbetweentheposition andthebackground variables.The no-background configuration, typically associated with mosaic-based setups, exclu- sively occurs with predefined positioning (six out of six cases, see Figure 10). In contrast, random positioning is always paired with either uniform or compositional backgrounds, and never with no-background. Generability and Type (1.0). There is also a perfect association between the generability of an evaluation method andthetype ofvisualelementsusedinitsdataset.Foramethodtobegeneralizable,it must not be tied to a specific dataset but should be applicable to real-world datasets and adaptable to new ones. In practice, all generalizable methods in the survey use real imagesastheirvisualinputtype.Incontrast,allmethodsusingsimple orcomplex synthetic figures are non-generalizable. These typically rely on pre-designed datasets that limit their portability to other settings. This pattern suggests that real-world image types are a necessary condition for generalizability. GT Value and Measure (0.91). The choice of evaluation measure is strongly influenced by the type of GT value used. When the GT is a binary mask, studies typically apply Spatial Alignment Metrics (12 out of 12 in this survey). For relative GT values (only one case here), which aim to capture differences in importance across regions, Comparative metric is used to evaluate how well the explanation reflects these relative differences. In the case of multivalue GT there is no consistent association with a single type of metric. Type and Position (0.88). There is also a dependency between the type of visual element and its position. All methods that use random positioning employ either simple or complex synthetic figures, none of the methods with random positioning use real-world images. In con- trast,almostallmethodsusingreal-world imagesrelyonpredefined positioning.These aretypicallymosaic-basedmethods,whereimagesareplacedinfixedlayoutstocontrol the GT position. Only one method deviates from this pattern. Generability and Background (0.87). Thereisarelationshipbetweenthegenerability categoryandthebackground category. Specifically,datasetswithnobackground,whichtypicallyusemosaics,tendtobemore generalizable: all five generalizable methods in the survey use no background. These methodsallowuserstogeneratetheirownGT,providinggreaterflexibility.Incontrast, datasets with uniform or compositional backgrounds are typically associated with non-generalizable methods,relyingonfixedGTdatasetsandofferinglessadaptability. 19 Fig. 10: Co-occurrence matrix between subcategories. This analysis shows that methodological choices in SAIG techniques are highly interdependent.EvaluationmetricsarestronglyconstrainedbytheformofGTvalues: binaryGTsareconstentlypairedwithspatialalignmentmetrics,whilemoreexpressive GTs (e.g., multivalue or relative) necessitate alternative evaluation strategies. Design elements such as background type, feature positioning, and visual element type tend toco-occurinconsistentpatterns,forinstance,mosaic-basedsetupstypicallycombine no-background,predefinedpositions,andreal-worldimages.Furthemore,generalizable evaluations are associated with real-world images, whereas simple or complex types are strongly linked to non-generalizable setups. 20 Table 2: XAI methods used in each SAIG method. The first column grouped the methods according to the proposal from Speith [10], the second according to their output type, and the latter according to their inner working. In green, the best XAI method according to each SAIG article. Inner Speith[10] Output [41] [42] [34] [45] [35] [37] [36] [47] [48] [50] [51] [38] [49] [52] [53] [54] Total working Expl.byconcepts BagNet[57] ✓ 1 Ante-hoc Expl.byexamples ProtoPNet[11] ✓ 1 B-cos[69] ✓ ✓ 2 FeatureRelevance X-DNN[70] ✓ 1 Deconvnet[13] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 5 DeepLIFT[71] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 4 DeepTaylor[72] ✓ ✓ 2 Excit.Backprop.[73] ✓ 1 Gradient[14] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 10 GBP[59] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 8 Backprop. InputXGrad.[71] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 9 Int.Gradients[60] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 LRP[15] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 CheferLRP[74] ✓ 1 PatternAttr.[75] ✓ 1 PatternNet[75] ✓ 1 Feature SmoothGrad[58] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 9 Post-hoc Relevance VarGrad[76] ✓ 1 AblationCAM[77] ✓ ✓ 2 GradCAM[55] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 11 Grad-CAM++[18] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 5 CAM GuidedGradCAM[55] ✓ ✓ ✓ 3 Layer-CAM[78] ✓ 1 Score-CAM[61] ✓ ✓ 2 SIDU[79] ✓ 1 LIME[16] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 8 MAPLE[80] ✓ 1 Occlusionsens.[13] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 4 Perturb. RISE[81] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 4 Rollout[82] ✓ 1 SHAP[83] ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 7 Expl.byconcept TCAV[56] ✓ 1 21 6.1 Disagreement in SAIG Evaluations It is also important to analyze the results obtained by each SAIG method. Table 2 indicates,whenspecifiedbytheoriginalauthors,whichXAImethodswereconsidered the best according to their respective evaluation criteria. However, some authors did not specify which XAI method ranked highest in their evaluation. The data show a clear lack of consensus among the different SAIG methodologies, with various methods being identified as the best across studies. This variation sug- geststhattheperformanceofXAImethodsishighlycontext-dependent,influencedby factors such as the underlying model and dataset. Furthermore, as already discussed, most methods do not make a comprehensive review of this field prior to their pro- posal. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to provide such a review of this field. As a result, the lack of consensus has remained largely unrecognised in the analyses of the existing SAIG methods. Therefore,althoughoneofthemainobjectivesofallthereviewedSAIGmethodsis to address the limitations of XAI methods and metrics, particularly the disagreement problem[19],theseapproachesthemselvesalsoexhibitdisagreement.Interestingly,an inverse form of consensus can be observed: certain methods are consistently never identified as the best. This recurring underperformance suggests a potential lack of reliability or correctness in some XAI methods. We expected that any post-hoc method would be less faithful to the explana- tion than an ante-hoc approach, and therefore to obtain worse results. We can verify whether this is the case with the two SAIG methods that used ante-hoc approaches: Hesse et al. [51] and Fresz et al. [52]. We can see that our expectation, in the study of Freszet al.[52],isnottrue.Weconsiderthatthisunexpectedbehaviorarisesbecause this SAIG method requires high AI accuracy to serve as a reliable GT. 7 Conclusions In this paper, we introduced the concept of SAIG methods as a unified class of machine-centered approaches for evaluating XAI methods. Although such methods haveemergedindependentlyinvariousstudies,thisworkisthefirsttoformallydefine and categorize them within a common framework. Our proposed taxonomy analyzes the design dimensions of these methods, including GT definition, image composition, evaluation metrics, generability, among others. By doing so, we introduce SAIG as a methodological family within the broader landscape of XAI evaluation. Our analysis revealed interdependencies among design decisions in SAIG meth- ods.Furthermore,weidentifiedalackofconsensusinSAIGevaluations.Despitetheir aim of providing objective evaluations of XAI methods, these approaches often result in divergent conclusions regarding which explanation techniques are the most faith- ful. This shows that SAIG evaluations, while promising, remain sensitive to design assumptions, task definition, and dataset choices. XAI methods are widely used not only by developers but also by non-technical users,particularlythefeaturerelevancemethods,alsocalledfeatureattributionmeth- ods [84]. However, the reliability of these methods remains an open question. Before assessing how convincing these explanations are to human users, we argue that it is 22 essential first to evaluate how accurately they reflect the behavior of the underlying model. Since this is precisely the goal of SAIG methods, and given that they are all groundedinthesamemainideaofgeneratingaGTtoevaluateexplainabilitymethods, a promising direction for future work is the development of a unified framework that integratesexistingSAIGapproaches.Byleveragingboththeirsharedfoundationsand methodological differences, such a framework could help address the inconsistencies currentlyobservedacrossSAIGevaluationsandsupportmorerobustandcomparable assessments of XAI methods. Declarations Funding Anna Arias Duart acknowledges her AI4S fellowship within the “Generaci´on D” ini- tiative by Red.es, Ministerio para la Transformaci´on Digital y de la Funci´on Pu´blica, for talent attraction (C005/24-ED CV1), funded by NextGenerationEU through the Recovery, Transformation and Resilience Plan (PRTR). Gabriel Moy`a-Alcover and MiquelMir´o-NicolaucontributionispartoftheProjectPID2023-149079OBI00funded by MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by ERDF/EU. Competing Interests The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. References [1] Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G.E.: Imagenet classification with deep convolutionalneuralnetworks.Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems 25 (2012) [2] Alhamoud, K., Alshammari, S., Tian, Y., Li, G., Torr, P.H., Kim, Y., Ghassemi, M.: Vision-language models do not understand negation. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 29612–29622 (2025) [3] Rahmanzadehgervi, P., Bolton, L., Taesiri, M.R., Nguyen, A.T.: Vision language models are blind. In: Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 18–34 (2024) [4] Chen, L., Li, J., Dong, X., Zhang, P., Zang, Y., Chen, Z., Duan, H., Wang, J., Qiao, Y., Lin, D., et al.: Are we on the right way for evaluating large vision-language models? In: The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems [5] Yan, Q., He, X., Yue, X., Wang, X.E.: Worse than random? an embarrassingly simple probing evaluation of large multimodal models in medical vqa. In: GenAI for Health: Potential, Trust and Policy Compliance 23 [6] Barredo Arrieta, A., D´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, A., Garcia, S., Gil-Lopez, S., Molina, D., Benjamins, R., Chatila, R., Herrera, F.: Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI 58, 82–115 [7] Vilone, G., Longo, L.: Notions of explainability and evaluation approaches for explainable artificial intelligence 76, 89–106 [8] Adadi, A., Berrada, M.: Peeking Inside the Black-Box: A Survey on Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 6, 52138–52160 [9] Longo, L., Brcic, M., Cabitza, F., Choi, J., Confalonieri, R., Ser, J.D., Guidotti, R., Hayashi, Y., Herrera, F., Holzinger, A., Jiang, R., Khosravi, H., Lecue, F., Malgieri, G., P´aez, A., Samek, W., Schneider, J., Speith, T., Stumpf, S.: Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 2.0: A manifesto of open challenges and interdisciplinary research directions 106, 102301 [10] Speith, T.: A Review of Taxonomies of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) methods. In: 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans- parency, pp. 2239–2250 [11] Chen, C., Li, O., Tao, D., Barnett, A., Rudin, C., Su, J.K.: This looks like that: deeplearningforinterpretableimagerecognition.Advancesinneuralinformation processing systems 32 (2019) [12] Nauta, M., Schl¨otterer, J., Van Keulen, M., Seifert, C.: Pip-net: Patch-based intuitive prototypes for interpretable image classification. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2744– 2753 (2023) [13] Zeiler,M.D.,Fergus,R.:VisualizingandUnderstandingConvolutionalNetworks [14] Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A.: Deep Inside Convolutional Networks: Visualising Image Classification Models and Saliency Maps [15] Bach, S., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Klauschen, F., Mu¨ller, K.-R., Samek, W.: On Pixel-Wise Explanations for Non-Linear Classifier Decisions by Layer-Wise Relevance Propagation 10(7), 0130140 [16] Ribeiro,M.T.,Singh,S.,Guestrin,C.:”Whyshoulditrustyou?”Explainingthe predictions of any classifier 13-17-Augu, 1135–1144 1602.04938 [17] Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Lapedriza, A., Oliva, A., Torralba, A.: Learning Deep Features for Discriminative Localization 2004(1), 2921–2929 [18] Chattopadhay, A., Sarkar, A., Howlader, P., Balasubramanian, V.N.: Grad- CAM++: Generalized gradient-based visual explanations for deep convolutional 24 networks 2018-Janua, 839–847 [19] Krishna, S., Han, T., Gu, A., Wu, S., Jabbari, S., Lakkaraju, H.: The Disagree- ment Problem in Explainable Machine Learning: A Practitioner’s Perspective [20] Nauta, M., Trienes, J., Pathak, S., Nguyen, E., Peters, M., Schmitt, Y., Schl¨otterer,J.,VanKeulen,M.,Seifert,C.:FromAnecdotalEvidencetoQuanti- tative Evaluation Methods: A Systematic Review on Evaluating Explainable AI 55, 1–42 [21] Amengual-Alcover, E., Jaume-i-Cap´o, A., Mir´o-Nicolau, M., Moy`a-Alcover, G., Paniza-Fullana, A.: Towards an Evaluation Framework for Explainable Artificial Intelligence Systems for Health and Well-being [22] Bodria, F., Giannotti, F., Guidotti, R., Naretto, F., Pedreschi, D., Rinzivillo, S.: Benchmarking and survey of explanation methods for black box models 37(5), 1719–1778 [23] Doshi-Velez, F., Kim, B.: Considerations for Evaluation and Generalization in Interpretable Machine Learning. In: Explainable and Interpretable Models in Computer Vision and Machine Learning, pp. 3–17 [24] Biecek, P., Samek, W.: Position: Explain to Question not to Justify. In: Proceed- ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3996–4006 [25] Samek, W., Binder, A., Montavon, G., Lapuschkin, S., Muller, K.-R.: Evaluating theVisualizationofWhataDeepNeuralNetworkHasLearned28(11),2660–2673 27576267 [26] Alvarez-Melis,D.,Jaakkola,T.S.:OntheRobustnessofInterpretabilityMethods [27] Agarwal, C., Johnson, N., Pawelczyk, M., Krishna, S., Saxena, E., Zitnik, M., Lakkaraju, H.: Rethinking Stability for Attribution-based Explanations [28] Yeh, C.-K., Hsieh, C.-Y., Suggala, A., Inouye, D.I., Ravikumar, P.K.: On the (in)fidelity and sensitivity of explanations. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32 [29] Tomsett, R., Harborne, D., Chakraborty, S., Gurram, P., Preece, A.: Sanity Checks for Saliency Metrics 34(04), 6021–6029 1912.01451 [30] Hedstr¨om, A., Bommer, P.L., Wickstrøm, K.K., Samek, W., Lapuschkin, S., H¨ohne, M.M.: The Meta-Evaluation Problem in Explainable AI: Identifying Reliable Estimators with MetaQuantus [31] Mir´o-Nicolau, M., Jaume-i-Cap´o, A., Moy`a-Alcover, G.: Meta-evaluating Stabil- ity Measures: MAX-Sensitivity and AVG-Sensitivity. In: Explainable Artificial Intelligence, pp. 356–369 25 [32] Mir´o-Nicolau, M., Jaume-i-Cap´o, A., Moy`a-Alcover, G.: A comprehensive study on fidelity metrics for XAI 62(1), 103900 [33] Cortez, P., Embrechts, M.J.: Using sensitivity analysis and visualization tech- niques to open black box data mining models 225, 1–17 [34] Yang, M., Kim, B.: Benchmarking attribution methods with relative feature importance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.09701 (2019) [35] Guidotti, R.: Evaluating local explanation methods on ground truth. Artificial Intelligence 291, 103428 (2021) [36] Arras,L.,Osman,A.,Samek,W.:Clevr-xai:Abenchmarkdatasetfortheground truth evaluation of neural network explanations. Information Fusion 81, 14–40 (2022) [37] Arias-Duart,A.,Par´es,F.,Garcia-Gasulla,D.,Gimenez-Abalos,V.:Focus!rating xaimethodsandfindingbiases.In:2022IEEEInternationalConferenceonFuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), pp. 1–8 (2022). IEEE [38] Mir´o-Nicolau, M., Jaume-i-Cap´o, A., Moy`a-Alcover, G.: Assessing fidelity in xai post-hoc techniques: A comparative study with ground truth explanations datasets. Artificial Intelligence 335, 104179 (2024) [39] Bastings, J., Ebert, S., Zablotskaia, P., Sandholm, A., Filippova, K.: “Will You Find These Shortcuts?” A Protocol for Evaluating the Faithfulness of Input Salience Methods for Text Classification. In: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 976–991 [40] Agarwal, C., Krishna, S., Saxena, E., Pawelczyk, M., Johnson, N., Puri, I., Zit- nik, M., Lakkaraju, H.: OpenXAI: Towards a Transparent Evaluation of Model Explanations 35, 15784–15799 [41] Ross, A.S., Hughes, M.C., Doshi-Velez, F.: Right for the right reasons: Training differentiable models by constraining their explanations. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2662– 2670 (2017) [42] Oramas, J., Wang, K., Tuytelaars, T.: Visual explanation by interpretation: Improving visual feedback capabilities of deep neural networks. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2018) [43] Lin,T.-Y.,Maire,M.,Belongie,S.,Hays,J.,Perona,P.,Ramanan,D.,Doll´ar,P., Zitnick, C.L.: Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In: Computer vision– ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13, pp. 740–755 (2014). Springer 26 [44] Zhou,B.,Lapedriza,A.,Khosla,A.,Oliva,A.,Torralba,A.:Places:A10million imagedatabaseforscenerecognition.IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisand Machine Intelligence (2017) [45] Shah, H., Jain, P., Netrapalli, P.: Do input gradients highlight discriminative features? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, 2046–2059 (2021) [46] Arias-Duart, A., Mariotti, E., Garcia-Gasulla, D., Alonso-Moral, J.M.: A con- fusion matrix for evaluating feature attribution methods. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3709–3714 (2023) [47] Mamalakis, A., Barnes, E.A., Ebert-Uphoff, I.: Investigating the fidelity of explainableartificialintelligencemethodsforapplicationsofconvolutionalneural networks in geoscience. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems 1(4), 220012 (2022) [48] Rao, S., Bohle, M., Schiele, B.: Towards Better Understanding Attribution Methods. In: 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10213–10222 [49] Bohle, M., Fritz, M., Schiele, B.: Convolutional dynamic alignment networks for interpretable classifications. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10029–10038 (2021) [50] Kim,J.S.,Plumb,G.,Talwalkar,A.:Sanitysimulationsforsaliencymethods.In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11173–11200 (2022). PMLR [51] Hesse,R.,Schaub-Meyer,S.,Roth,S.:Funnybirds:Asyntheticvisiondatasetfora part-basedanalysisofexplainableaimethods.In:ProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3981–3991 (2023) [52] Fresz, B., L¨orcher, L., Huber, M.: Classification metrics for image explana- tions:towardsbuildingreliablexai-evaluations.In:Proceedingsofthe2024ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 1–19 (2024) [53] Zhou, Y., Booth, S., Ribeiro, M.T., Shah, J.: Do feature attribution methods correctlyattributefeatures?In:ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence, vol. 36, pp. 9623–9633 (2022) [54] Tjoa,E.,Guan,C.:Quantifyingexplainabilityofsaliencymethodsindeepneural networks with a synthetic dataset. IEEE Transactions on artificial Intelligence 4(4), 858–870 (2022) [55] Selvaraju, R.R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., Batra, D.: Grad-CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-Based 27 Localization 128(2), 336–359 1610.02391 [56] Kim, B., Wattenberg, M., Gilmer, J., Cai, C., Wexler, J., Viegas, F., sayres, R.:Interpretabilitybeyondfeatureattribution:Quantitativetestingwithconcept activation vectors (TCAV). In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 80, pp. 2668–2677 [57] Brendel, W., Bethge, M.: Approximating CNNs with Bag-of-local-Features mod- elsworkssurprisinglywellonImageNet.In:InternationalConferenceonLearning Representations [58] Smilkov, D., Thorat, N., Kim, B., Vi´egas, F., Wattenberg, M.: SmoothGrad: Removing noise by adding noise 1706.03825 [59] Springenberg, J.T., Dosovitskiy, A., Brox, T., Riedmiller, M.: Striving for Simplicity: The All Convolutional Net, 1–14 1412.6806 [60] Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., Yan, Q.: Axiomatic Attribution for Deep Networks [61] Wang, H., Wang, Z., Du, M., Yang, F., Zhang, Z., Ding, S., Mardziel, P., Hu, X.: Score-CAM: Score-Weighted Visual Explanations for Convolutional Neural Networks. In: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), pp. 111–119 [62] Wah, C., Branson, S., Welinder, P., Perona, P., Belongie, S.: Caltech ucsd birds 2002011.TechnicalReportCNS-TR-2011-001,CaliforniaInstituteofTechnology (2011) [63] Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein, M., et al.: Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision 115(3), 211–252 (2015) [64] Krizhevsky, A., Hinton, G., et al.: Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images (2009) [65] Quattoni,A.,Torralba,A.:Recognizingindoorscenes.In:2009IEEEConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 413–420 (2009). IEEE [66] Par´es,F.,Arias-Duart,A.,Garcia-Gasulla,D.,Campo-Franc´es,G.,Viladrich,N., Ayguad´e, E., Labarta, J.: The mame dataset: on the relevance of high resolution and variable shape image properties. Applied Intelligence 52(10), 11703–11724 (2022) [67] Rubner, Y., Tomasi, C., Guibas, L.J.: The earth mover’s distance as a metric for image retrieval. International journal of computer vision 40, 99–121 (2000) 28 [68] Judd, T., Durand, F., Torralba, A.: A benchmark of computational models of saliency to predict human fixations (2012) [69] B¨ohle, M., Singh, N., Fritz, M., Schiele, B.: B-Cos Alignment for Inherently Interpretable CNNs and Vision Transformers 46(6), 4504–4518 [70] Hesse, R., Schaub-Meyer, S., Roth, S.: Fast axiomatic attribution for neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems [71] Shrikumar, A., Greenside, P., Kundaje, A.: Learning important features through propagating activation differences. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3145–3153 (2017). PMlR [72] Montavon, G., Samek, W., Mu¨ller, K.-R.: Methods for interpreting and under- standing deep neural networks 73, 1–15 [73] Zhang, J., Bargal, S.A., Lin, Z., Brandt, J., Shen, X., Sclaroff, S.: Top-Down Neural Attention by Excitation Backprop 126(10), 1084–1102 [74] Chefer, H., Gur, S., Wolf, L.: Transformer Interpretability Beyond Attention Visualization, pp. 782–791 [75] Kindermans, P.-J., Schu¨tt, K.T., Alber, M., Mu¨ller, K.-R., Erhan, D., Kim, B., D¨ahne, S.: Learning how to explain neural networks: Patternnet and patter- nattribution. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2018). https://openreview.net/forum?id=Hkn7CBaTW [76] Adebayo, J., Gilmer, J., Goodfellow, I., Kim, B.: Local Explanation Methods for Deep Neural Networks Lack Sensitivity to Parameter Values [77] Desai, S., Ramaswamy, H.G.: Ablation-CAM: Visual Explanations for Deep Convolutional Network via Gradient-free Localization. In: 2020 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 972–980 [78] Jiang, P.-T., Zhang, C.-B., Hou, Q., Cheng, M.-M., Wei, Y.: LayerCAM: Exploring Hierarchical Class Activation Maps for Localization 30, 5875–5888 [79] Muddamsetty, S.M., Jahromi, M.N.S., Ciontos, A.E., Fenoy, L.M., Moeslund, T.B.: Visual explanation of black-box model: Similarity Difference and Unique- ness (SIDU) method 127, 108604 [80] Plumb, G., Molitor, D., Talwalkar, A.S.: Model agnostic supervised local expla- nations 31 [81] Petsiuk, V., Das, A., Saenko, K.: RISE: Randomized Input Sampling for Explanation of Black-box Models 1 1806.07421 29 [82] Abnar,S.,Zuidema,W.:Quantifyingattentionflowintransformers.In:Proceed- ingsofthe58thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics, pp. 4190–4197 [83] Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.-I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predictions 30 [84] Calderon, N., Reichart, R.: On behalf of the stakeholders: Trends in NLP model interpretability in the era of LLMs. In: Chiruzzo, L., Ritter, A., Wang, L. (eds.) Proceedingsofthe2025ConferenceoftheNationsoftheAmericasChapterofthe Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Vol- ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 656–693. Association for Computational Linguistics, Albuquerque, New Mexico (2025). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long. 29 . https://aclanthology.org/2025.naacl-long.29/ 30